Attention-related networks in Alzheimer's disease: A resting functional MRI study
Wu 2,# , Adam S. Fleisher 3,4 , Eric M. Reiman 3 , Kewei Chen 3 , and Li Yao 1,2,* Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing China Information Science and Technology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China Alzheimer’s Institute (BAI) & Banner Good Samaritan PET Center, Phoenix, AZ 85006,
Introduction
      
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder clinically characterized by progressive dementia together with global cognitive impairments (Braak and Braak, 1991; Blennow et al., 2006).
 Neuroimaging investigations of AD provide additional perspectives of the disease pathophysiology and have demonstrated repeatedly potentials to serve as biomarkers with high sensitivity and specificity for the characterization or detection of the disease’s onset, severity and progression.
 It is hoped that, with additional validations, neuroimaging based biomarkers can aid in early clinical diagnosis of this brain disorder, the
*Correspond to: Li Yao, Address: School of Information Science and Technology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China, Telephone number: 86-10-58807727, Facsimile number: 86-10-58807727, yaoli@bnu.edu.cn. #Both authors contributed equally to this work.
rapid evaluation of treatment effectiveness aimed at delay and even prevention of AD (Greicius et al., 2004; Sorg et al., 2007).
The study of intrinsic spontaneous brain activity under the resting condition, observed as the fluctuations of blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signals measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), has provided new information about several brain disorders ( Garrity et al., 2007; Uddin et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2009) including AD (Greicius et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2006; Sorg et al., 2007).
 The pattern of the spontaneous activities over multiple brain regions is in fact an integration of multiple coherent spatiotemporal resting-state networks (RSNs), related to various processes such as the visual, auditory, motor, sensory, attention as well as the so-called default-mode network (DMN) (Greicius et al., 2003; Fox et al., 2005, 2006; Damoiseaux et al., 2006; Mantini et al., 2007).
 Researchers have demonstrated that altered intrinsic brain RSN connectivity might be a reflection of either structural, physiological, metabolic or other functional changes due to a disease process (Greicius et al., 2004; Matthews et al., 2006; Buckner and Vincent, 2007; Fox and Raichle, 2007; Sorg et al., 2007).
 Among these multiple RSNs, the DMN, which is characterized by a relative increase in neural activity in specific brain regions during the resting-state and suppression during most goal-oriented tasks, is thought to function in monitoring the external environment and supporting internal mentation as well as episodic memory processing (Greicius et al., 2003, 2004).
 The DMN has generated wide-spread interest and has been investigated in various brain disorders, including AD.
 Researchers have found disrupted functional connectivity of DMN and hypometabolism in core DMN regions such as the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), inferior parietal cortex (IPC) and medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures (Greicius et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2006).
 The alterations in connectivity within the DMN and with other structures have been suggested to be directly related to AD pathology (Hedden et al., 2009), considered to impact of disease symptoms (Pihlajamaki et al., 2009) and proposed as potential biomarkers for AD (Greicius et al., 2004; Sorg et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2009).
 It would be of great interest to go beyond the investigations of DMN for understanding brain connectivity abnormalities related to AD.
 Though DMN is also suggested to be involved in mind wandering, consolidating the past knowledge, stabilizing brain ensembles and preparing for the future actions (Buckner and Vincent, 2007; Mason et al., 2007; Morcom and Fletcher, 2007; Raichle and Snyder, 2007; Fair et al., 2008) in addition to its association with episodic memory processing, certain AD related deficits such as, attention has not been reportedly related to DMN.
 Considerable amount of evidence has suggested that attentional impairment, following the initial amnesic stage, is an early clinical manifestation of AD (Reid et al., 1996; Perry and Hodges, 1999; Perry et al., 2000).
 Both behavioral data and task-based neuroimaging studies have detected attention deficits in auditory (Grearing et al., 1991) and visual spatial (Hao et al., 2005) attention-related processing involved in divided attention (Nebes and Brady, 1989; Nestor et al., 1991; Filoteo et al., 1992; Johannsen et al., 1999), selective attention (Grearing et al., 1991; Hao et al., 2005) and attentional shifting (Filoteo et al., 1992; Perry and Hodges, 1999) in AD.
 These previous neuroimaging studies of attentional deficits in AD mainly focused on the detection of abnormal activations in the brain during performing cognitive tasks.
 Functional connectivity alterations of the attention-related RSNs have not been specifically addressed.
Recent resting-state fMRI studies distinguished two attention networks from spontaneous neuronal activity: the dorsal attention network (DAN) and the ventral attention network
(VAN) ( Fox et al., 2006).
 These two attention networks have been employed as a model in task-related imaging studies suggesting that different attentional operations during sensory orienting are carried out by the interaction and cooperation between the two separate attention systems (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002).
 The DAN, which is bilaterally centered on the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and the frontal eye fields (FEF), appears to be involved in the endogenous goal-driven attention orienting (top-down) process and responsible for the preparation and selection for stimuli and responses (Shulman et al., 1999, 2003; Corbetta et al., 2000, 2005; Hopfinger et al., 2000; Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Astafiev et al., 2003; Giesbrecht et al., 2003; Fox et al., 2006).
 The VAN includes the right lateralized temporal- parietal junction (TPJ) and the ventral frontal cortex (VFC), appears to be involved in an exogenous stimuli-driven attention re-orienting (bottom-up) process, and is activated when detecting the unexpected salient targets (Corbetta et al., 2000; Corbetta and Shulman 2002; Astafiev et al., 2003, 2004; Kincade et al., 2005; Fox et al., 2006).
 In patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), a prodromal stage of AD (Petersen et al., 1999; Blennow et al., 2006; Gauthier et al., 2006), functional connectivity appears to be preferentially affected in a selected subset of RSNs, including DMN and DAN (Sorg et al., 2007).
 Resting-state spontaneous brain activity alterations due to aging, disease process such as aMCI and AD (Sorg et al., 2009) have been reported at regional (Bai et al., 2007; He et al., 2007; Li et al., 2002), inter-regional (Allen et al., 2007; Greicius et al., 2004; Sperling, 2007; Wang et al., 2007) and the large-scale levels (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; Buckner et al., 2009; Sanz-Arigita et al., 2010; Stam et al., 2007).
 Graph theory-based computational approaches have identified the aging or AD caused disconnections in regions or systems relevant to higher-order cognitive processing including the default mode network and attention systems (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007, Buckner et al., 2009; Sanz-Arigita et al., 2010).
 These findings motivated us to more closely examine the two DAN/VAN networks and their relations with AD.
 Conducting the current study, we hypothesized that attentional deficits observed in performing many tasks by patients with AD would be reflected by decline of intrinsic neural activity related to one or both of the these two attentional networks, and an examination of the attention-related RSNs in the view of functional connectivity analysis may contribute to the systematic understanding of intrinsic physiological causes behind the attention deficits.
 In the present study we investigated the functional connectivity of the resting-state attention networks in patients with AD using resting fMRI and compare attention networks to the DMN as we previously reported (Wu et al., 2010 accepted).
 To do this we evaluated connectivity patterns in both DAN and VAN and differences in these patterns between patients with AD and healthy elderly normal control (NC) subjects.
 For the purpose of establishing biomarkers to characterize AD, the activities of the core regions of these two attention networks were examined as indices to distinguish the diseased condition from normal in comparison with DMN’s performance.
 FMRI data from 15 patients with AD and 16 NC subjects were used in this study.
 We first used group independent component analysis (Group ICA) (Greicius et al., 2004; Damoiseaux et al., 2006; Mantini et al., 2007; Sorg et al., 2007; Li et al., 2009) to derive the DAN and the VAN.
 Then, group comparison of each of the two attention systems between NC and AD was performed to examine the possible functional connectivity changes affected by the disease.
 And finally, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was performed for the resting activity measures of core regions in the DAN, VAN and DMN to generate sensitivity and specificity characteristics and compare their performance in discriminating the AD patients from NC.
Fifteen patients (six males) with AD aged 53 to79 years old (Mean ± SD: 64 ± 8.27 years), average MMSE: 12 (range: 0 - 20), and 16 healthy elderly subjects (seven males) of NC aged 47 to 79 years old (Mean ± SD: 65 ± 9.20 years), MMSE: 29 (range: 27 - 30) were each scanned under his/her resting condition.
 Five of the 15 patients had a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score of 1 and 6 had CDR 2.
 The remaining four patients had CDR 3.
 We consider those patients with a CDR score of 1 to be mild, those with a CDR 2 to be moderate and 3 to be severe dementia (Morris, 1993).
 Participants were instructed simply to keep their eyes closed and not to think of anything in particular.
 No need of the sedation was determined for all patients and their fMRI data acquisition was found no significant movement.
 All participants were recruited and scanned at Beijing Tiantan Hospital.
 All the AD patients were free of other diseases and the subjects of NC group were free of any known medical, neurological, and psychiatric disorders.
 The purpose of the study was explained to the participants and/or caregivers and each of them gave written informed consent approved by a local institutional review board prior to the experiment.
 The MRI scans were read clinically and the patients with evidence of a stroke or other focal pathology were excluded.
MRI scanning was performed on 3-Tesla Siemens whole-body MRI system at Tiantan Hospital in Beijing, China.
 Gradient echo-planar imaging was used to acquire 20 axial slices (6 mm thickness, 0 mm gap, field of view, 256 × 256 mm 2 ; matrix size, 64 × 64; repeat time, 2000 ms; echo time, 30 ms; flip angle, 85°; 250 repetitions per time series).
 A high- resolution T1-weighted 3D MRI sequence with the following parameters was also acquired: 1 mm thickness; 0 mm gap; repeat time, 2100 ms; echo time, 3.25 ms and flip angle, 10°.
For each participant, the first 5 scans of the fMRI time series were discarded to allow for equilibration of the magnetic field.
 Data pre-processing steps included within-subject spatial realignment, between-subject spatial normalization to a standard brain template in the Montreal neurological institute (MNI) coordinate space and smoothing by a Gaussian filter with a full width at half maximum of 8 mm using SPM2 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). Following this, the linear trend with regards to time was removed by linear regression.
We performed the Group ICA to the preprocessed data by using the fMRI toolbox GIFT ( http://icatb.sourceforge.net/) (Calhoun et al., 2001), which includes two rounds of principle component analysis (PCA) for data dimension reductions, ICA separation and back- reconstruction.
 The optimal number of principal components was estimated based on the minimum description length (MDL).
 The data were separated by ICA using the Extended Infomax algorithm (Lee et al., 1999).
 After ICA separation, the common ICs and the corresponding time courses over all subjects were used for the back-reconstruction of the ICs and the time courses for each individual subject (Calhoun et al., 2001).
 The independent components that best matched the DAN or VAN were separately selected in each group.
 To do this, the network template for DAN and VAN as shown in Fig. 1 was firstly developed separately based on a set of regions reported previously (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002;Fox et al., 2006) for each of the two attentional networks.
 Each region in the DAN or VAN template was spherical with the previously reported coordinate as the center and a radius of 5 mm (varying radius ranged from 3 to 8, size of the sphere had no effect for the component identification), and the average value of voxels within the template minus that of voxels outside the core regions over the template was then calculated for each component.
 Finally, the component that had the greatest difference was the best-fit component, designated as the DAN or VAN for each group [same as the DMN identification (Wu et al., 2010 accepted)].
 After a conversion of the intensity values in each IC spatial map to z-score, one sample t-test (with multiple comparison correction using False Discovery Rate, FDR, p = 0.05) was then used to derive the group network pattern.
 The network difference between NC and AD was determined by two sample t-test (FDR corrected, p = 0.05).
The core regions within each network were identified again from the group functional connectivity maps created by the one sample t-test.
 By taking the intersection of the corresponding region defined by Anatomical Automatic Labeling (AAL) atlas toolbox (Mazoyer, et al., 2001) and the within group one sample t-test map with a cut-off threshold at p = 0.05 FDR as the regions of interest (ROIs), we calculated the average z-scores and the volumes of the core brain regions defined over the IC map for each subject which were respectively used to represent the intensity and the spatial extent of resting activity.  ROC curve analysis has been commonly used to summarize the sensitivity and specificity of a biomarker for distinguishing a patient group from the other.
 The present study used ROC curve analysis to investigate the sensitivity and specificity characteristics of the activity and spatial extents in the core regions of DAN, VAN and DMN in order to compare their performance in distinguishing the two groups.
NC and AD subjects Fig. 2A1 and A2 show respectively the DAN connectivity maps in the NC and AD groups determined by Group ICA approach.
 The DAN in NC consists of bilateral inferior parietal lobe (IPL) and superior parietal lobe (SPL) which cover the IPS area, and regions in and around the FEF including the bilateral middle frontal gyrus (MFG), superior frontal gyrus (SFG) and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG).
 The DAN in AD includes bilateral IPL, bilateral MFG and left precentral gyrus, which also involves the IPS and FEF regions.
 Visually examining the two maps, the DAN intrinsic activity in the NC group is higher and spatially spreads more than in AD group as shown in Fig. 2A1 and A2.
 The significant DAN cluster locations within each of the two groups are shown in Table I.
 Consistent with the visual observation above, Fig. 2A3 displays the statistical map resulted from the two sample t-test (FDR, p = 0.05) comparing the DAN in NC vs. AD groups.
 Compared with NC, patients with AD had significant decreased functional connectivity in bilateral IPL and SPL, left MFG and SFG and bilateral IFG.
 The reverse contrast (AD vs. NC) did not yield any significant clusters.
 Brain regions showing significant decreased functional connectivity in AD group are listed in Table II.
Fig. 2B1 and B2 show respectively the VAN in the NC and AD groups.
 The VAN is right hemisphere lateralized in both NC and AD groups, and both consist of the right TPJ regions including supramarginal gyrus, IPL, SPL, middle temporal gyrus (MTG), and inferior temporal gyrus (ITG), as well as right VFC covering MFG, SFG and IFG.
 Additionally, small clusters in the left hemisphere including IPL and IFG are also observed.
 Significant clusters of the VAN in the two groups are shown in Table III.
 No significant VAN differences were found at FDR corrected p = 0.05 between the NC and AD groups.
 With more liberal uncorrected p = 0.001, decreased VAN functional connectivity in AD when compared to NC was found in the neighborhood of the left supramarginal gyrus, right SFG, MFG and MTG (Fig. 2B3 and Table IV).
Fig. 3 - Fig. 5 showed the ROC curves for the resting activity measures in the core regions from DAN (Fig. 3A and B), VAN (Fig. 4A and B) and DMN (Fig. 5A and B).
 The best cutoff between NC and AD were also marked with horizontal lines in the scatter plots for the core regions in the DAN (Fig. 3A1-A4 and B1-B4), VAN (Fig. 4A1-A2 and B1-B2) and DMN (Fig. 5A1-A6 and B1-B6).
For the core regions in the DAN, the resting activity intensity in the left IPS (lIPS) and left FEF (lFEF) are sensitive and specific to the disease, 85.7% and 86.7% for sensitivity, 100.0% and 81.2% for specificity respectively.
 In spatial extent of resting activity, the sensitivities were 100.0%, 100.0% and 86.7%, and specificities were 100.0%, 93.7% and 81.2% respectively for regions lIPS, lFEF and right IPS (rIPS).
 The right FEF (rFEF) was not sensitive to the disease in both the intensity and extent of resting activity (Fig. 3).
For the VAN regions, the TPJ area is with sensitivity 73.3% and specificity 81.2% to the disease in activity intensity ( Fig. 4).
 The activity spatial extent in TPJ, and both the intensity and extent in VFC are with less than 70% sensitivities or specificities.
 For DMN that was reported in our previous study (Wu et al., 2010 accepted), the PCC and MPFC had 73.3% and 86.7% sensitivities, and 93.7% and 75.0% specificities separately in activity intensity.
 And the spatial extent of PCC is with sensitivity 73.3% and specificity 81.2%.
 All other core DMN regions are with less than 70% sensitivities, specificities or both in extent and intensity of resting activity (Fig. 5).
In this study, we examined the intrinsic dorsal and ventral attention systems in healthy elderly subjects and patients with AD by applying Group ICA to resting fMRI data.
 The DAN derived in this study covers the left/right IPS and left/right FEF, and the VAN comprises the right TPJ and the right VFC.
 The anatomic patterns of the two attention systems revealed in the present study largely coincide with the ones previously reported in the specific attentional tasks induced studies (Hopfinger et al., 2000; Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Giesbrecht et al., 2003) and the seed-region based functional connectivity analysis (Fox et al., 2006).
 It was found that the functional connectivity of the DAN was disrupted.
 With regard to the VAN, on the contrary, fewer regions show disrupted functional connectivity in comparison of NC and AD.
 ROC curve analysis showed that the core regions in the DAN including lIPS, and lFEF, together with PCC from the DMN were highly sensitive and specific to the disease using the intensity, spatial extent or both of resting activity.
 Among them, the spatial extent and intensity in lIPS and spatial extent of lFEF of DAN show more than 85.0% sensitivity and specificity.
It was found that the DAN in AD altered its functional connectivity pattern compared with healthy elderly: all the core brain regions along the bilateral IPS including IPL and SPL, together with bilateral IFG, left MFG and SFG, which cover the FEF, consistently decreased their functional connectivity within the network ( Fig. 2A3 and Table II).
 RSNs derived from resting-state were regarded as either the co-activated brain regions which are modulated together in the task-dependent performances (Husain and Rorden, 2003; Kenet et al., 2003), or the representation of a dynamic readiness of these regions for expected usages (Pouget et al., 2003; Fox et al., 2006).
 As DAN presides over the endogenous, “top-down” attentional processes, like strengthening the sensory relevant input processing, facilitating the discrimination between target stimulus and distracters, and biasing the subject toward particular locations in which targets may appear (Kastner and Ungerleider, 2000; Sarter et al., 2001; Corbetta and Shulman, 2002), the disrupted IPS-FEF functional connectivity within the DAN in AD may suggest that a series of top-down attentional processes are impaired by AD.
 It suggests that patients with AD would perform poorly on attentional-related tasks supported by DAN, such as having difficulty in detecting and selecting proper objects from the distracters, as well as in properly responding in accordance with previously learned response rules.
 Behavioral studies have revealed the “top-down” related attentional processes, such as the divided attention, which refers to the ability to respond simultaneously to multiple tasks (Anderson et al., 2000; Fernandes and Moscovitch, 2000; Kane and Engle, 2000), and selective attention, which refers to the capacity to screen out irrelevant stimuli (Perry and Hodges, 1999; Lavie et al., 2004; Fernandez-Duque and Black, 2008), are very vulnerable in AD (Nebes and Brady 1989; Nestor et al., 1991; Filoteo et al., 1992; Parasurman and Haxby, 1993; Johannsen et al., 1999; Perry and Hodges, 1999).
 The divided attention generally elicits activation of the right frontal and parietal regions, and especially favors the right prefrontal attentional site (Johannsen et al., 1997, 1999).
 In a Positron Emission Tomography (PET) study in AD, the right MFG, SFG and IFG significantly showed reduced activity compared with healthy old group when performing the divided attention tasks (Johannsen et al., 1999).
 In two visual search tasks of selective attention, including a conjunction task requiring feature binding, and a subset task without feature binding, one fMRI study found decreased activity in the bilateral parietal and the frontal lobes.
 In particular they found decreased task-related activity in the left parietal and left frontal regions in AD patients compared to elderly normal controls (Hao et al., 2005).
 In the present study, we also noticed that the left regions within the DAN, relative to the right part, had more significantly decreased functional connectivity in both the intensity and extent of resting activity (Fig. 2A3 and Table II), suggesting that the left regions of the DAN are more seriously impaired by the disease.
 Though AD patients may fail to attend to goal-relevant information, they might still have the ability to reorient to novel or unexpected stimulus-relevant information, as suggested by the preservation of the VAN functional organization.
 No VAN core region showed significant decreased activity at the same statistical significant level used in the comparison of DAN connectivity between NC and AD.
 Only small clusters showed decreased activity at a more liberal uncorrected type-I error (Fig. 2B3 and Table IV).
 The less impaired right VFC-right TPJ functional connectivity within the VAN might ensure AD patients the ability of controlling “bottom-up” attentional processes, such as sustained attention, in which the subjects are required to keep watch for inconspicuous or unpredicted stimuli among more frequent non-targets over prolonged periods of time (Wilkins et al., 1987;Perry and Hodges, 1999).
 Plenty of behavioral analysis has found preserved sustained attention in early and moderate AD patients (Parasurman and Haxby, 1993;Johannsen et al., 1999;Perry and Hodges, 1999).
 Functional neuroimaging studies using PET or fMRI have found sustained attention elicits a predominantly right-sided frontoparietal network (Pardo et al., 1991;Coull et al., 1996;Perry and Hodges, 1999), which is similar to the VAN organization determined in the present work.
 In Johannsen’s PET study, the right IPL and right MTG from the TPJ, right MFG from the VFC, and anterior cingulate cortex were found to be activated in sustained attention tasks, with no significant difference in these regions between healthy
elderly and early AD patients (Johannsen et al., 1999).
 The limited affects on VAN connectivity in moderate to severe AD during rest found in the present investigation might suggest that the VAN is stable and less susceptible to the impact of the disease.
Though no attention-related tasks were evaluated in the present study, it is worth to point out that our findings provide a systematic approach to the investigation of intrinsic physiological causes behind the attentional deficits in AD and provide a marker potentially feasible for disease diagnosis, progression and drug testing.
biomarkers characterizing the disease of AD ROC curve analysis showed that the core regions in the DAN including lIPS, and lFEF, together with PCC from the DMN were highly sensitive and specific to the disease in both the intensity and spatial extent of resting activity.
Consistent with the above functional connectivity analysis of the DAN, the left regions in the network (lIPS and lFEF) showed high sensitivity and specificity to disease.
 The lIPS has 85.7% sensitivity and 100.0% specificity to the disease in activity intensity.
 And in spatial extent both the sensitivity and specificity reached 100.0%.
 This suggests that the left part of the DAN system is quite vulnerable to AD, and patients with AD significantly decrease their resting activity in both intensity and spatial extent compared with the healthy elderly.  For the VAN, though only small clusters show decreased functional connectivity at a more liberal uncorrected testing, the ROC curve analysis has found the TPJ in the network shows 73.3% sensitivity and 81.2% specificity to AD in the intensity of resting activity.
 While the spatial extent in TPJ, and both the intensity and extent in VFC, showed less than 70% sensitivity to AD.
 This suggests that the disease associated with AD has primarily affected the intensity of resting activity in the VAN, especially in the TPJ area.
 ROC curve analysis of the DMN reveals that the resting activity intensity and spatial extent of PCC show more than 70% sensitivity and specificity to the disease.
 And the MPFC also has 86.7% sensitivity and 75.0% specificity in the intensity of resting activity.
 All other DMN regions show less than 70% sensitivities, specificities or both, in extent and intensity of resting activity.
 This suggests that the PCC and MPFC in the DMN can be used as biomarkers to distinguish AD from NC.
The present study employed Group ICA to extract the DAN/VAN patterns from resting-state fMRI data.
 In order to further validate the reliability and repeatability of the ICA-based findings, we used an alternative approach, seed-region based correlation analysis, to study the DAN/VAN patterns and the between-group difference in the same dataset.
 This correlation approach requires priori specified seed regions to begin with.
 Independent of the present results, we used the spatial locations reported in Fox et al. (2006) to specify seed regions for DAN and VAN each.
 Several seed regions were used to detect the attention networks to cross-validate the results.
 The seed regions from DAN include core regions lIPS (Tal: −42, −41, 43), rIPS (Tal: 35, −47, 45), lFEF (Tal: −25, −12, 55), rFEF (Tal: 28, −10, 53) and a combination of these four regions.
 For the VAN, we specified core regions TPJ (Tal: 57, −43, 34), VFC (Tal: 47, 14, 32), and also with a combination of these two.
 Due to their dependence on seed regions, correlation maps generated from different seeds differ obviously in spatial patterns, but all have included the main areas of the attention systems.
 Our main ICA-based findings were found mostly similar to the correlation maps generated from the combined seed regions for DAN/VAN each, and were similar to the DAN/VAN spatial configurations reported in previous tasks-relevant studies (Hopfinger et al., 2000; Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Giesbrecht et al., 2003).
 Consistent with the ICA results, decreased activity was also found in the DAN correlation map of AD with less but still significant type-I errors.
 Compared to the correlation analysis, the ICA approach seemed more sensitive to detect the between-group differences.
 A plausible explanation is that the ICA characterized DAN/VAN is free of the respiratory artifact and other noise (which were additional ICs) (Beckmann et al., 2005; Birn et al., 2008; Kiviniemi et al., 2003), while these nuisance might have some effects on the correlation analysis maps.
 Despite of these differences and our preference of ICA, we observed very similar findings using these two different approaches.
We note that the current study is conducted with a relatively small number of study participants.
 A large independent dataset would be needed in future studies for the validation of the present findings especially for the ROC cut-off in an independent comparison in terms of specificity and sensitivity.
 Furthermore, such a larger study is even more important in developing neuroimaging-based tools for early diagnosis and disease progression.
 We also note that our current investigation focused on the classification of patients with AD from normal controls.
 Additional studies are needed and important for the extension from the classification of clinically characterized AD cases and normal controls to more clinically relevant diagnosis among different types of dementia and to predictions for subsequent cognitively decline among neuropathological diagnosis in early symptomatic cases when clinical diagnosis is least certain.
 In this regards, both the previous examination of the DMN (Wu et al., 2010 accepted) and our current exploration of resting state attentional networks in AD are preliminary and mainly for a better understanding of the underlying brain systems and cognitive processes that are preferentially affected by AD.
 Additional studies are needed to further characterize the sensitivity and specificity of this approach in an independent data set, extend it to determine its sensitivity and specificity to predict subsequent clinical progression and the neuropathological diagnosis of AD in the earliest symptomatic or presymptomatic stages of AD, and determine the extent to which this measurement can be used longitudinally to provide information about disease progression.
 Finally, we note that our current study explored the DAN/VAN differences/similarities between AD and NC.
 No attempt was made in this study to examine if the cause of the connectivity deficit in AD is functional, structural or both.
 Such an examination in further studies will be needed with both fMRI data and structural (such as volumetric MRI) or diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data.
In summary, the current study examined the resting-state attention networks in healthy elderly and AD, and found disrupted DAN and preserved (less impaired) VAN functional connectivity in AD, suggesting an impaired “top-down” and intact “bottom-up” attentional processing mechanism in AD patients.
 We also found that core regions in the DAN including lIPS, and lFEF, together with PCC from the DMN could potentially serve as biomarkers with relatively high sensitivity and specificity to the disease of AD.
We would like to thank MD.
 Yumei Zhang and Xiaoting Guan from Beijing Tiantan Hospital for their assistance with data collection.