DTI Correlates of Distinct Cognitive Impairments in Parkinson’s Disease
Abstract: The spectrum of cognitive symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (PD) can span various domains, including executive function, language, attention, memory, and visuospatial skills.
 These symptoms may be attributable to the degradation of projection fibers associated with the underlying neurodegenerative process.
 The primary purpose of this study is to find microstructural correlates of impairments across these cognitive domains in PD using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
 Sixteen patients with PD with comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation and DTI data were retrospectively stud- ied.
 Fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) were assessed using regions-of-interest (ROI) analysis and confirmed with a voxel-based approach.
 Executive function directly correlated with FA and inversely correlated with MD in mostly frontal white matter tracts, especially the anterior limb of the internal capsule and genu of the corpus callosum.
 Likewise, language and attentional performance demonstrated correlations with DTI parameters in the frontal regions, but the attention domain additionally recruited regions widespread throughout the brain, with the most significant correlation identified in cingulate gyrus (cingulum).
 Lastly, memory impairment mainly involved MD alterations within the fornix.
 No significant correlations were found between visuospatial skills and DTI measures.
 Despite some overlap, unique patterns of white matter diffusivity underlie impairments in distinct cognitive domains in patients with PD.
 DTI combined with neurocognitive tests may be a valuable biomarker for identifying cognitive impairments in PD.
 Hum Brain Mapp 35:1325–1333, 2014.
 V C 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
 Key words: cognition; Parkinson’s; connectivity; tractography; neurodegenerative; white matter; neuroimaging; brain
The cognitive impairments of Parkinson’s disease (PD) can affect multiple domains, including frontal/executive function, memory, visuospatial skills, attention, and language [ McKinlay et al., 2009; Zgaljardic et al., 2003].
 Despite its prevalence and impact, the spectrum of impairment and neural basis of cognitive impairments in PD are not fully characterized.
 Patterns of cognitive impairments are likewise variable, including patients with predominant impairments in fronto-striatally mediated function, others with impairments of temporal lobe-medi- ated functions, and others with both [Foltynie et al., 2004a; Williams-Gray et al., 2007, 2009].
 The heterogeneity is likely attributable to distinct patterns and combinations of neurochemical degeneration (e.g., dopaminergic nigro- striatal degeneration vs. cholinergic degeneration (e.g., basal nucleus of Meynert [Gaspar and Gray, 1984])) and unique anatomic patterns of Lewy body deposition (in contrast to the uniform progression of synucleinopathies suggested by Braak et al. [2003].
 While frontal executive impairments are likely dopaminergically mediated, varying with a common functional polymorphism in the cate- chol-O-methyltransferase gene (COMT Val 158 Met) which modulates prefrontal dopamine availability [Foltynie et al., 2004b; Williams-Gray et al., 2009], temporal lobe mediated impairments are more likely related to cholinergic impairments and more extensive subcortical and neocortical Lewy body deposition [Emre, 2003; Gaspar and Gray, 1984; Goris et al., 2007; Mattila et al., 2000; Williams-Gray et al., 2009].
 Demonstration of the anatomic basis and sep- arability of these distinct patterns of cognitive impairment would greatly enhance our understanding of these processes, facilitate anatomically driven investigations of the neurobiological processes underlying these impairments, and impact the clinical management of patients with PD.
 Several studies have confirmed the relationship between white matter changes and the motor manifestations of PD [Bohnen and Albin, 2011; Yoshikawa et al., 2004; Zhan et al., 2012].
 Likewise, we hypothesize that the cognitive aspects of the disease are also likely due to neurodegenerative processes disrupting the integrity of white matter microstructure but within distinct cerebral networks.
 However, the neuroanatomical basis and topography of the neurobiological processes that account for these cognitive impairments have not been well characterized due to limitations in prior neuroimaging analyses and the use of coarse, incomplete, and inadequate neurocognitive assessments, like the mini-mental status examination (MMSE) in Parkinson’s patients [Gattellaro et al., 2009; Hattori et al., 2012].
 Studies have shown that tools that are not specific for PD (e.g., MMSE and SF-36) have poor accuracy and reliability in diagnosing cognitive impairment, dementia, and quality-of-life (QOL) in PD [Brown et al., 2009; Kulisevsky and Pagonabarraga, 2009].
 DTI parameters, such as fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD), can be used to infer neural sub- strates underlying specific cognitive functions when correlated with neuropsychological performance [Sasson et al., 2012].
 In this study, we used DTI to evaluate the relationship between measures of white matter integrity in prede- fined regions-of-interest (ROIs) and performance in five distinct cognitive domains (executive function, language, attention, memory, and visuospatial skills) in 16 patients with PD with varying degrees of cognitive impairment, as detailed using comprehensive neuropsychological testing.
 A post hoc voxel-based analysis was supplemented to con- firm the ROI-based results.
 We tested two hypotheses: (1) Impairments in different cognitive domains are associated with changes in white matter integrity in distinct cerebral networks.
 (2) The degree of impairment in each domain correlates with quantitative measures of white matter integrity within the distinct networks.
Sixteen patients (11 males, 5 females, average age 62.2 Æ 9.6 years) who had undergone evaluation for stereotactic implantation of deep brain stimulators for PD were included in this retrospective study.
 All patients were from UCLA’s stereotactic neurosurgery database through August 2011 and had detailed preoperative neuropsychological testing results and MRI data.
 Patients’ Hoehn and Yahr clinical staging while on medication had a mean of 2.3 Æ 0.9 with mean disease duration of 9.5 Æ 6.0 years.
 All studies and analysis were done after obtaining ap- proval from and in accordance with guidelines provided by the UCLA Institutional Review Board.
Neuropsychological testing was performed as part of evaluation for deep brain stimulation surgery in a clinical context.
 All assessments were done in an ‘‘on’’ medication condition and included comprehensive testing spanning five cognitive domains (executive function, memory [short-term and long-term], visuospatial skills, language, and attention).
 Due to the inhomogeneity of the neurocognitive tests used to evaluate each domain in this clinical dataset and in order to reduce the feature set analyzed, we derived a single score for each patient in each cognitive domain based on a pre-selected list of domain-representa- tive tests.
 Each patient’s detailed neuropsychological testing result was carefully and independently reviewed by two independent evaluators, who calculated an average percentile score for each domain for each subject using the age-matched percentile scores from the domain-representa- tive tests.
 Age-matched percentile scores rather than raw performance scores were used to correct for potential age- related differences in performance.
 In cases with more than a 5 percentile discrepancy, a third evaluator provided  Lower percentile scores indicate more impairment.
 WMS-IV 1⁄4 Wechsler Memory Scale, Fourth Edition; CVLT 1⁄4 California Verbal Learning Test; NAB 1⁄4 Neuropsychological Assessment Battery; VOT 1⁄4 Visual Organization Test; WAIS 1⁄4 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale; DKEFS 1⁄4 Delis Kaplan Executive Func- tion System.
 SD 1⁄4 standard deviation.
 a blind evaluation and determined the most representative score for the domain in question (Table I).
TABLE 1. Results of neuropsychological evaluation for each cognitive domain
            
               Percentile Score
              
                
                  
                    
                     Mean
                     SD
                     Range
                  
                
                
                  
                     Executive function
                     44.16
                     22.57
                     7–82
                  
                  
                     Color-word interference
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Letter fluency
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Category fluency
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Category switching
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Number-letter switching
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Short-term memory
                     39.48
                     26.16
                     1–83
                  
                  
                     WMS-IV logical memory I
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     CVLT Trials 1–5
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Short delay free recall
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Long-term memory
                     44.44
                     26.93
                     2–79.5
                  
                  
                     WMS-IV logical memory
                     II
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Long delay free recall
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Visuospatial skills
                     43.47
                     29.32
                     6–91
                  
                  
                     NAB visual discrimination
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Hooper VOT
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     WAIS matrix reasoning
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Block design
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Language
                     48.56
                     28.94
                     6–95
                  
                  
                     WAIS verbal comprehension
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Boston naming test
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Letter fluency
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Animal fluency
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     WAIS vocabulary
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Attention
                     40.48
                     26.48
                     2–91
                  
                  
                     Trails A
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Stroop/DKEFS-word
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     Stroop/DKEFS-color
                    
                    
                    
                  
                  
                     WAIS digit span
                    
                    
                    
                  
                
              
            
            Percentile Score Mean SD Range Executive function 44.16 22.57 7–82 Color-word interference Letter fluency Category fluency Category switching Number-letter switching Short-term memory 39.48 26.16 1–83 WMS-IV logical memory I CVLT Trials 1–5 Short delay free recall Long-term memory 44.44 26.93 2–79.5 WMS-IV logical memory II Long delay free recall Visuospatial skills 43.47 29.32 6–91 NAB visual discrimination Hooper VOT WAIS matrix reasoning Block design Language 48.56 28.94 6–95 WAIS verbal comprehension Boston naming test Letter fluency Animal fluency WAIS vocabulary Attention 40.48 26.48 2–91 Trails A Stroop/DKEFS-word Stroop/DKEFS-color WAIS digit span
          
MRI data were acquired with a 3.0 Tesla scanner.
 Sequences included a high-resolution T1-weighted ana- tomical scan with the following parameters: Repetition time (TR) 1⁄4 11 ms, Echo time (TE) 1⁄4 2.81 ms, flip angle 1⁄4 20 , matrix size 1⁄4 256 Â 256, slice thickness 1⁄4 0.90 mm with no gap, and resolution 1⁄4 0.94 Â 0.94 Â 0.90 mm 3 .
 In addition, all patients had undergone a 20-direction DTI acquisition, except for one with a 60-direction acquisition, using diffusion weighted single-shot spin-echo EPI with b 1⁄4 1,000 s/mm 2 , TR 1⁄4 9,100 ms–14,400 ms, TE 1⁄4 87 ms, matrix size 1⁄4128 Â 128, slice thickness 1⁄4 2 mm with no gap, resolution 1⁄4 2 Â 2 Â 2 mm 3 .
 In each subject, at least  one volume was acquired without the use of a diffusion gradient (b 1⁄4 0 s/mm 2 ).
Imaging analysis was carried out using FSL tools ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl). The first preprocessing step was to manually inspect each DTI data to eliminate any volumes with large distortions that could potentially skew the data.
 Next, skull stripping with the brain extrac- tion tool (BET) was applied to both the T1 and b 1⁄4 0 image in each subject.
 Eddy current correction was used to correct for distortions and head motion on the DTI sequences by aligning the diffusion weighted images to the b 1⁄4 0 image.
 Tensors were determined using DTIFIT, producing FA and MD maps.
 For the ROI-based analysis, 40 ROIs (Table II), from Johns Hopkins University’s Mori white matter atlas (http:// cmrm.med.jhmi.edu), were transformed into each patient’s diffusion space using transformation matrices created from nonlinear registration between the patient’s diffusion space and standard space (FMRIB58_FA).
 Using fslstats, average FA and MD values were calculated for each ROI and were linearly regressed against neurocognitive scores in each domain.
 Only correlations that exceeded a statistical threshold of P < 0.01 are reported.
 A post hoc regionally unbiased voxel-based analysis was carried out to account for multiple comparisons and verify the significant results from the ROI analysis.
 Nonlinear registration was applied to align all subjects’ 3D FA images to the FMRIB58_FA template and then all FA images were merged to create a single 4D FA image.
 Using the transformations from the FA normalization, each sub- ject’s MD image was similarly registered to the standard tar- get and a merged 4D MD image was generated.
 A 2 mm full width at half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian smoothing was applied to the normalized FA and MD images.
 Voxel- wise statistics was run to test for correlations between the FA and MD images with each cognitive domain performance using nonparametric permutation t tests (3,000 permutations) and threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE).
 The significance threshold was set at P < 0.05.
 Additional analyses were performed to evaluate for possible confounding variables, particularly age.
 Cognitive performance in each domain was also evaluated for correlation with disease severity measures including Hoehn and Yahr, disease duration, total UPDRS (off state), and UPDRS III motor performance (off state) in patients in whom such data was available (n 1⁄4 7).
TABLE 2. Mori atlas white matter ROIs
            
              
                
                
                  
                     Genu
                     Genu of corpus callosum
                  
                  
                     Body
                     Body of corpus callosum
                  
                  
                     Splenium
                     Splenium of corpus callosum
                  
                  
                     Fornix
                     Fornix (column and body)
                  
                  
                     CST
                     B. Corticospinal tract
                  
                  
                     CP
                     B. Cerebral peduncle
                  
                  
                     ALIC
                     B. Anterior limb of internal capsule
                  
                  
                     PLIC
                     B. Posterior limb of internal capsule
                  
                  
                     RLIC
                     B. Retrolenticular limb of internal capsule
                  
                  
                     ACR
                     B. Anterior corona radiata
                  
                  
                     SCR
                     B. Superior corona radiata
                  
                  
                     PCR
                     B. Posterior corona radiata
                  
                  
                     PTR
                     B. Posterior thalamic radiation (include optic radiation)
                  
                  
                     SS
                     B. Sagittal stratum (include ILF and IFO)
                  
                  
                     EC
                     B. External capsule
                  
                  
                     CG
                     B. Cingulate gyrus (Cingulum)
                  
                  
                     HC
                     B. Hippocampus (Cingulum)
                  
                  
                     FST
                     B. Fornix stria terminalis
                  
                  
                     SLF
                     B. Superior longitudinal fasciculcus
                  
                  
                     SFO
                     B. Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus
                  
                  
                     IFO
                     B. Inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus
                  
                  
                     TAP
                     B. Tapetum
                  
                  
                     B 1⁄4 bilateral; ILF 1⁄4
                     inferior longitudinal fasciculus
                  
                
              
            
            Genu Genu of corpus callosum Body Body of corpus callosum Splenium Splenium of corpus callosum Fornix Fornix (column and body) CST B. Corticospinal tract CP B. Cerebral peduncle ALIC B. Anterior limb of internal capsule PLIC B. Posterior limb of internal capsule RLIC B. Retrolenticular limb of internal capsule ACR B. Anterior corona radiata SCR B. Superior corona radiata PCR B. Posterior corona radiata PTR B. Posterior thalamic radiation (include optic radiation) SS B. Sagittal stratum (include ILF and IFO) EC B. External capsule CG B. Cingulate gyrus (Cingulum) HC B. Hippocampus (Cingulum) FST B. Fornix stria terminalis SLF B. Superior longitudinal fasciculcus SFO B. Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus IFO B. Inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus TAP B. Tapetum B 1⁄4 bilateral; ILF 1⁄4 inferior longitudinal fasciculus
          

            Figure 1. Variability in cognitive domain performance for each individual. Performance across domains was variable across subjects, with individual subjects demonstrating particular strengths and weakness in distinct domains.
          
TABLE 3. Significant ROI-based correlations of FA and MD with cognitive domains verified with voxelwise analysis
            
               Fractional anisotropy Mean diffusivity
              
                
                  
                     cognitive domains
                     ROIs
                     P-value
                     ROIs
                     P-value
                  
                
                
                  
                     Executive function
                     Anterior corona radiata, right
                     0.0087
                     Anterior corona radiata, right 1
                     0.0023
                  
                  
                    
                     Anterior limb of internal capsule, left
                     0.0029
                     Anterior corona radiata, left 1
                     0.0063
                  
                  
                    
                     Genu
                     0.0099
                     Anterior limb of internal capsule, left
                     0.003
                  
                  
                    
                     Posterior thalamic radiation, right 1
                     0.0044
                     Genu
                     0.0097
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Posterior corona radiata, left 1
                     0.0092
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Sagittal stratum, left 1
                     0.0041
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left 1
                     0.0037
                  
                  
                     Short-term memory
                     None
                    
                     Fornix
                     0.0037
                  
                  
                     Long-term memory
                     None
                    
                     Anterior corona radiate, right 1
                     0.0068
                  
                  
                     Visuospatial
                     None
                    
                     None
                    
                  
                  
                     Language
                     Anterior limb of internal capsule, left
                     0.0087
                     Anterior corona radiata, right
                     0.0074
                  
                  
                    
                     Sagittal stratum, right
                     0.0015
                     Anterior corona radiata, left
                     0.0068
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Sagittal stratum, right
                     0.0031
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Sagittal stratum, left 1
                     0.0035
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left
                     0.0077
                  
                  
                     Attention
                     Cingulate gyrus, right
                     0.0071
                     Anterior corona radiata, right
                     0.0013
                  
                  
                    
                     Cingulate gyrus, left
                     0.0003
                     Anterior limb of internal capsule, left
                     0.0046
                  
                  
                    
                     Posterior thalamic radiation, right
                     0.0056
                     Corticospinal tract, left
                     0.007
                  
                  
                    
                     Posterior thalamic radiation, left
                     0.001
                     Cingulate gyrus, left
                     0.0006
                  
                  
                    
                     Retrolenticular part of internal capsule, left
                     0.0096
                     Hippocampus, left
                     0.0031
                  
                  
                    
                     Sagittal stratum, left
                     0.0079
                     Posterior corona radiata, right
                     0.0062
                  
                  
                    
                     Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, right
                     0.004
                     Posterior corona radiata, left
                     0.0081
                  
                  
                    
                     Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left
                     0.0046
                     Posterior thalamic radiation, left
                     0.0027
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Retrolenticular part of internal capsule, left
                     0.0017
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Sagittal stratum, left
                     0.0087
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Splenium
                     0.001
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Superior corona radiata, right
                     0.0066
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Superior corona radiata, left
                     0.0064
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, right
                     0.0049
                  
                  
                    
                    
                    
                     Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left
                     0.0013
                  
                
              
            
            Fractional anisotropy Mean diffusivity cognitive domains ROIs P-value ROIs P-value Executive function Anterior corona radiata, right 0.0087 Anterior corona radiata, right 1 0.0023 Anterior limb of internal capsule, left 0.0029 Anterior corona radiata, left 1 0.0063 Genu 0.0099 Anterior limb of internal capsule, left 0.003 Posterior thalamic radiation, right 1 0.0044 Genu 0.0097 Posterior corona radiata, left 1 0.0092 Sagittal stratum, left 1 0.0041 Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left 1 0.0037 Short-term memory None Fornix 0.0037 Long-term memory None Anterior corona radiate, right 1 0.0068 Visuospatial None None Language Anterior limb of internal capsule, left 0.0087 Anterior corona radiata, right 0.0074 Sagittal stratum, right 0.0015 Anterior corona radiata, left 0.0068 Sagittal stratum, right 0.0031 Sagittal stratum, left 1 0.0035 Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left 0.0077 Attention Cingulate gyrus, right 0.0071 Anterior corona radiata, right 0.0013 Cingulate gyrus, left 0.0003 Anterior limb of internal capsule, left 0.0046 Posterior thalamic radiation, right 0.0056 Corticospinal tract, left 0.007 Posterior thalamic radiation, left 0.001 Cingulate gyrus, left 0.0006 Retrolenticular part of internal capsule, left 0.0096 Hippocampus, left 0.0031 Sagittal stratum, left 0.0079 Posterior corona radiata, right 0.0062 Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, right 0.004 Posterior corona radiata, left 0.0081 Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left 0.0046 Posterior thalamic radiation, left 0.0027 Retrolenticular part of internal capsule, left 0.0017 Sagittal stratum, left 0.0087 Splenium 0.001 Superior corona radiata, right 0.0066 Superior corona radiata, left 0.0064 Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, right 0.0049 Superior fronto-occipital fasciculus, left 0.0013
          

            Figure 2. Statistically significant ROIs in each cognitive domain overlaid on top of a standard brain in axial view. Refer to Table III for abbreviated ROIs. L 1⁄4 left; R 1⁄4 right; A 1⁄4 anterior; P 1⁄4 posterior.
          
Mean age-matched percentile performance scores in each cognitive domain are reported in Table I, ranging between 39.48 and 48.56.
 No significant differences were noted between performance across domains (one-way ANOVA, P < 0.05), but individual patient performance varied across domains, as shown by the large range, with some patients having borderline performance (less than 10th percentile) in one domain while performing superiorly in other domains (greater than 90th percentile) (Fig. 1).
 There were no significant correlations between age and either neurocognitive scores in each domain or FA and MD values in the 40 ROI evaluated (85 comparisons), with the exception of MD values within the right hippocampus and age (P 1⁄4 0.0083).
 No significant correlations were observed between neurocognitive scores and disease severity measures.
 Significant ROI correlations (P < 0.01) between the neurocognitive domain scores and DTI parameters were identified in every cognitive domain except for the visuospatial domain (Table III).
 A graphical representation of the significant interactions is presented in Figures 2 and 3.
 In general, FA results positively correlated with improved performance in each domain, whereas MD showed negative correlations with domain-specific scores (Fig. 3).
 Overall, MD values were more often correlated with scores in each domain than FA values (Table III).
 The results were not significantly lateralized.
 The most representative results are summarized here briefly.
 Executive function primarily correlated with frontal connecting tracts including the left anterior limb of the internal capsule (ALIC) and genu of the corpus callosum (genu).
 Linguistic performance was mostly correlated with the left ALIC, left superior-fronto-occipital fasciculus (SFO), and bilateral sagittal strata (SS).
 The attention domain had the most associations identified throughout the brain with strong correlations in the splenium of corpus callosum (splenium), the left sides of cingulate gyrus (CG), posterior thalamic radiation (PTR), retrolenticular limb of the internal capsule (RLIC), and SS.
 The post hoc voxel- based analysis (accounting for multiple comparisons) verified the findings of the ROI-based approach with few exceptions (detailed in Table III).

          Figure 3. Regression analyses between DTI indices and measures of cognitive performance. Representative regions of the most significant correlations from each domain are graphed. FA positively correlated with neurocognitive scores, whereas, MD negatively correlated with the scores.
        
Although a number of DTI studies have been conducted to better understand PD pathology, only a few have focused on the cognitive correlates of the disease and mostly relied on the use of MMSE as a cognitive assessment instrument [Hattori et al., 2012], our study is the first to demonstrate a comprehensive approach to studying the broad range of cognitive deficits in PD by using DTI coupled with domain specific neurocognitive tests.
 In our study, we found that unique patterns of white matter signal characteristics (i.e., FA and MD values derived from DTI) are related to differential performance in distinct cognitive domains in patients with PD.
 While previously recognized in the neuropsychological literature [Kantarci et al., 2011; Sasson et al., 2012], this study confirms that, despite some overlap, impairments in distinct cognitive domains are subserved by different white matter networks.
 Moreover, the degree of impairment in each domain is related to the degree to which the white matter region of interest is affected (Fig. 3).
The spectrum of cognitive impairments observed in this population confirms previous reports that have shown PD to involve cognitive deficits across multiple domains, including frontal/executive function, language, attention, memory, and visuospatial skills [ Karlsen et al., 1998; Schrag et al., 2000].
 Previous reports have revealed that most patients with PD exhibit an attentional-executive dysfunction with possible progression to impairments in language, memory, and visuospatial performance [Janvin et al., 2003; Muslimovic et al., 2005].
 Cognitive impairments related to impairments in frontal lobe function appear to be the most prominent and typically occur early in the disease stage [Bruck et al., 2004; Farina et al., 2000; Lees and Smith, 1983; Taylor et al., 1986].
 However, the nature of cognitive impairments is variable across patients, as patients can have one system impaired seem- ingly without having others affected, and the observed impairments may not be correlated with one another.
Executive function, generally referring to higher cognitive tasks involving planning, initiating, and monitoring goal- directed behavior [ McKinlay et al., 2010], is often regarded as the most common and profound cognitive deficit in patients with PD [Lewis et al., 2003; Zgaljardic et al., 2003].
 Our results, from both FA and MD measures, revealed that executive dysfunction in PD was largely, yet not exclu- sively, associated with changes in DTI signal characteristics in frontal projection fibers, including the ACR, ALIC (connections between the frontal cortex, striatum, and thalamus), genu of corpus callosum (prefrontal connections between the two hemispheres), SFO (connections between frontal lobe and parietal lobe), and the sagittal stratum, which includes the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus.
 These findings are consistent with a meta-analysis of neuroimaging and lesion studies in normal and non-PD subjects impli- cating these regions in executive function [Alvarez and Emory, 2006].
 From recent DTI studies, parietal lobe associations in particular have been shown to involve executive functioning.
 In one normal aging DTI study, significant MD correlates were found in the white matter region adjacent to the inferior frontal gyrus and fronto-parietal parts of the superior longitudinal fasciculus [Sasson et al., 2012].
 In another aging study, significant FA correlates were identified in bilateral areas extending from the prefrontal cortex to the parietal lobe, with projections to the anterior portions of the thalamus [Grieve et al., 2007].
 Unlike executive function, significant correlations between attention and surrogate measures of microstructural integrity were found to be more widespread throughout the brain, engaging the most number of white matter tracts compared to the other domains.
 The widespread associations likely are in part attributable to the distrib- uted nature of attentional networks, which include alert- ing, orienting, and executive attention components [Posner and Rothbart, 2007].
 Although diffuse correlations were identified, the most significant associations with the attention domain were found in the left cingulate gyrus (cingulum) (P < 0.001) and splenium (P 1⁄4 0.001).
 Diffusion abnormalities have previously been reported in the cingulum in patients with PD [Gattellaro et al., 2009; Kamagata et al., 2012; Karagulle Kendi et al., 2008].
 Nonverbal memory impairment was associated with MD alterations in the fornix (short-term) and the right ACR (long-term).
 The fornix contains connections with the hippocampus, a major brain region crucial for memory functioning, and other structures associated with memory, including the anterior thalami, septal nuclei, and mammil- lary bodies.
 Our finding is in agreement with the current literature investigating the role of the fornix in memory [D’Esposito et al., 1995; Mielke et al., 2012; Thomas et al., 2011; Zhuang et al., 2012].
 Finally, the results of the language domain revealed all frontal connecting white matter regions and considerably overlapped with the executive cognitive domain.
 One possible explanation for such overlap could be attributed to some of the similar neurocognitive tests used to assess the two domains.
 Measures of verbal fluency including letter fluency and category/animal fluency were used in both domains.
 In general, across domains, MD in various subcortical regions was more strongly associated with performance in distinct cognitive domains than FA.
 FA and MD are thought to reflect different tissue characteristics, with FA sensitive to tissue directionality and organization, and MD to tissue den- sity [Farina et al., 2000; Wiltshire et al., 2010].
 Consistent with knowledge about the neurodegenerative processes of PD, the current results suggest that deterioration in cognitive function is related to a more severe general loss of axons/brain tissue than disruptions in tissue coherence.
 Finally, although we hypothesized and largely observed that distinct cognitive domains are supported by different brain networks, we found the MD in the right ACR to be consistently related to performance in multiple domains (except the visuospatial domain).
 Given the commonality of this association across multiple domains, consideration should be given to an overriding phenomenon that may be pervasive and affecting performance in all domains.
 Specifi- cally, we hypothesize that the association of ACR with motor performance may have adversely affected performance across multiple domains, independent of true function in each domain.
 This highlights the possibility that standardized tests designed in otherwise normal patient populations may not be directly applicable to diseased populations and may require cautious and expert interpretation by trained neuropsychologists.
 In the case of PD, an assessment tool specifically designed for PD may be more appro- priate for capturing the wide spectrum of cognitive changes associated with this neurodegenerative disease.
 The PD- Cognitive Rating Scale (PD-CRS), for example, provides the best combination of acceptability, internal consistency, and test-retest and inter-rater reliability and includes assessments of both frontal-subcortical and instrumental-cortical function [Pagonabarraga et al., 2008].
Different methodologies have been described for assess- ing the relevance and significance of FA and MD values in regions of white matter tracts.
 While the atlas-based  approach employed here does not account for all inter- subject anatomic variability, the white matter atlas used is a reliable and validated atlas and the described methodol- ogy is well accepted.
 The alternative approach of tract- based analyses necessitate deriving FA and MD values from within subject-specific MR tractography-derived white matter tracts (either whole tract or along-tract statistics).
 Given the underlying hypothesis that there are changes in FA and MD associated with changes in distinct neurocognitive domains, one could not assume that equiv- alent and comparable MR-tractography could be performed in differentially affected subjects and tracts.
 Perhaps the most significant shortcoming of the current cross-sectional analysis relates to limitations of sample size.
 Yet, it provides a preliminary assessment and confir- mation of the hypothesis that impairments in distinct cognitive domains are subserved by unique networks.
 A prospective longitudinal study with age-matched controls and a standardized neurocognitive battery that is specific for PD would be needed to enable us to better assess the timing of neuroanatomical changes relative to cognitive impairments and to validate whether the putative biomarkers could be used for early detection.
This study demonstrates that the pattern of cognitive impairments seen in patients with PD is heterogeneous.
 While there are a few substructures that are implicated in impairment in multiple domains, microstructural changes as measured using DTI was mostly region specific to the function investigated.
 This mapping of subcortical networks may provide insight into the etiology of cognitive impairment in PD as well as provide guidance for future studies to identify early imaging biomarkers of cognitive impairment.
Authors acknowledge Dr.
 Antonio DeSalles for sharing his clinical database for evaluation for this study and Mr Eric Behnke for helping with image transfer protocols.